Welcome back.
Let's talk about our fifth sorting algorithm.
QuickSort even just from the name you're thinking, huh?
This is going to be quick.
QuickSort.
Just like merge sort is a divide and conquer algorithm.
Which means and should ring a bell in your head saying that there's probably going to be o of n log
n.
And if you're thinking that, you're right.
You see, QuickSort uses something called a pivoting technique to break the main list into smaller lists.
And these smaller lists use the pivoting technique until they are sorted.
But let me show you an animation of quicksort.
QuickSort works like this.
And if you're looking at this diagram like I am and you're completely confused as to what is happening,
this describes quicksort fairly well.
It's pretty complex to understand.
So let me show you a better demonstration.
I have a little diagram here.
Let's say we have a list that looks like this.
We have 3789521954.
What we do here is we pick a random pivot.
Let's say that four is going to be our pivot.
Once we pick this pivot item, we're going to say, all right, I want all numbers that are less than
four to come to its left and all numbers that are greater than four to come to its right.
So what do we do?
Well, we start comparing the numbers.
We look at three and four.
All right.
Three is to the left of four.
That's fine.
What about seven and four?
Hmm?
Seven is higher than four, so it should be to its right.
We're going to move four to the left position to make space for seven.
Seven jumps over to the right and we swap the five that four came into into the seven position.
And now we check five and four.
Oh, we've got to do the same thing.
We put five to the right of four and swap nine in there.
Once again, nine is higher than four.
So nine comes to the right of four.
Then we look at it.
Same thing with eight.
And then finally five and four.
Well, four and five switch places.
And now we have a list that has four as the pivot.
And we know that four is going to be in that position in the array and everything else to the left of
it and to the right of it still needs to get sorted, but at least we know where four stands.
From there, using divide and conquer, we now split the list and we do the same thing.
We get a pivot on the left list, which will be two, and we say everything to the right of to should
be higher.
Everything to the left of two should be lower.
And we have this left list sorted.
On the right.
We do the same thing until we split the list with seven in the middle.
And we keep breaking things down.
Keep breaking things down like a tree.
And this is where divide and conquer comes from.
Until we have all the individual lists sorted and we combine them.
Now, you might have two questions for me looking at this.
One is how do we even pick this pivot point?
And that is kind of random.
It really, really depends on the situation.
But as you see here, we just happen to pick the pivot point.
As always, the last item in the array.
The second is, how am I ever going to code this?
And this is pretty challenging and I don't expect you to get it.
I'll leave code for you and you can try it out if you want.
But the best way to understand QuickSort is my favorite Hungarian dance ever.
I'm not going to play this for you.
You can play it on your own.
But I swear I could watch this all day.
I think the dancing is awesome.
The music is awesome.
And well, if you speed it up to two times, it's even better.
Here in this video.
Let me mute this.
You'll see that this person in the black hat is going to be the pivot and everybody is comparing.
The person in the red hat is the pointer, I guess, or the item that's being compared to the pivot.
And you'll see here that as soon as we get to two, this person is number three, they're going to say,
oh, you should be to the left of me.
So they're going to dance.
By the way, great dancing moves.
I need to learn these steps.
And two and three.
Are now in different locations.
And now we compare zero and three.
Now this implementation and the visual that I just showed you is a little bit different, but the idea
is the same.
QuickSort can be implemented in different ways, but the idea of a pivot is the same.
I encourage you to watch this video to fully understand how how it works underneath the hood.
But let's go over the main concepts.
QuickSort is really, really useful.
And between QuickSort and Mercer, I would say those are the most used sorting algorithms.
You'll notice here two things.
One is that quick sorts space complexity is really, really good.
I mean, not as good as bubble sort or insertion sort or selection sort, but it's still better than
merge sort.
It's worst case is O of n squared.
That is because it can be over and squared when the pivot is the smallest or the largest item in the
list, because then you're not really splitting the list in half.
And because of this, you really want to make sure that you pick a good pivot for quicksort.
You'll get the better space complexity.
But the worst case could be bad.
So in those cases, merge sort might be better.
If your list was pre sorted for whatever reason.
And in that list, if we pick the pivot to be the first item or the last item, then our sorting routine
here would take a very, very long time because again, the list will not really be split in half.
And ideally in a quicksort.
You're picking the pivot intelligently based on your list.
Now quicksort, there's a lot of variance to it and there's different implementations.
But I want you to take this away from this video.
QuickSort is usually the fastest on average, but the one downside is that it has some pretty nasty
worst case behaviors.
So if you have to guarantee no bad data or you can't guarantee that the pivot is going to be good,
then you should be avoiding quicksort.
But on average, it's usually the best sorting algorithm.
All right.
So we've learned five different sorting algorithms, but the most important part is when should I use
what?
In the next video, we're going to go over exactly that, followed by a fun little exercise.
I'll see you in that one.